.\" SPDX-FileCopyrightText: 2022 Alyssa Ross <hi@alyssa.is>
.\" SPDX-FileCopyrightText: 2022 Katharina Fey <kookie@spacekookie.de>
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: CC-BY-SA-4.0
.Dd January 18, 2022
.UT RATMAND 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Rm ratmand
.Nd decentralised, peer-to-peer packet router
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl d
.Op Fl p | f
.Op Fl v Ar verbosity
.Op Fl b Ar addr
.Op Fl \-no-inet
.Op Fl \-inet Ar addr
.Op Fl \-no-discovery
.Op Fl \-discovery-iface Ar iface
.Op Fl \-discovery-port Ar port
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
is a stand-alone, decentralised routing daemon, and the core component
behind the Irdest project.  Ratman provides an alternative address
space via 256bit cryptographic keys, while peering with different
Ratman instances over a variety of transport mechanisms.
.Pp
The arguments are as follows:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl d , \-accept-unknown-peers
By default Ratman rejects unknown incoming peer requests.  To disable
this functionality you need to pass this flag.
.Pp
Note that if you want to run Ratman
.Em without
having to provide a set of peers to begin with (for example to purely
act as a peering server) then you
.Em must also
provide this flag.
.It Fl p , \-peers Ar PEERS
This multi-parameter flag allows you to specify an initial set of
peers to connect to.  The syntax used for this is called PEER_SYNTAX
and used across various components in Irdest.
.Pp
A peer is expressed as follows:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
<netmod>#<address>:<port>
.Ed
.Bl -inset
.It Va netmod
refers to name of the netmod that the peer should be introduced to.
Currently the only valid netmod-identifier is
.Dv inet .
.It Va address
contains the main address part.  Domain names (provided you have a
working DNS setup) are also accepted.
.It Va port
to connect to.
.El
.It Fl f , \-peer-file Ar PEER_FILE
Similar parameter to
.Fl p
but pointing to a file instead.  This file must then contain a peer
formatted in PEER_SYNTAX on each line.
.It Fl v , \-verbosity Ar verbosity
Ratman can be configured to log more or less, depending on your needs.
Following is a breakdown of available log levels and how they are
generally used.
.Bl -hang
.It Dv error
Only print unexpected behaviour that has caused some operation to
fail.  This does not mean that the whole router is crashing, but may
be an early indicator of a fault
.It Dv warn
Only print for unexpected behaviour that doesn't
otherwise impact the operation of the router.
.It Dv info
Print at most one statement for each high-level component
action.  It is possible to gauge the general operation of the
router from just these messages
.It Dv debug
Print at most two statements for each operation (for
example "start" and "finish").  Debug messages are plenty because
all components emit them, but limit their re-occurrence in each
component.
.It Dv trace
Includes individual step to each operation with no real limit on
recurrence.
.El
.It Fl b , \-bind Ar addr
Override the default listening port for Ratman IPC connections.  This
is useful in case you want to run multiple routers on the same
machine, but will cause issue with applications that don't allow you
to specify the IPC connection socket address, e.g.
.Xr irdest-echo 1 .
.It Fl \-no-inet
Disable the inet overlay driver.
.It Fl \-inet Ar addr
Specify the bind address and port for the netmod-inet overlay driver.
It supports both
.Xr ipv6 7
and
.Xr ip 7
address schemas.
.It Fl \-no-discovery
By default Ratman runs a local
.Xr ipv6 7
multicast discovery driver which will find other Ratman instances on
your local network to peer with.  This flag disables that
functionality.
.It Fl \-discovery-iface Ar iface
Bind to
.Ar iface
for local peer discovery.  If none is provided
.Nm
will attempt to guess the correct interface.
.It Fl \-discovery-port Ar port
Bind to
.Ar port
for local peer discovery.  Make sure this port is open in your
firewall.  The default port is 9001.
.Pp
.Em Warning :
it's not recommended to change this unless you know this is what you
want!
.El
.Sh EXIT STATUS
.Ex -std
.Sh EXAMPLES
.Bd -literal
# Start router daemon without connecting to any pre-defined peers,
# but accepting any incoming peering requests.
ratmand --accept-unknown-peers
.Ed
.Sh BUGS
Currently Ratman can only peer over an existing internet connection
but this will not always be the case.
.Pp
This is
.Em alpha
level software and will include bugs and cause crashes.  If you
encounter a reproducible issue, please report it!
.Bl -ohang
.It Issue tracker
.Lk https://git.irde.st/we/irdest/-/issues
.It Mailing list
.Lk https://lists.irde.st/archives/list/community@lists.irde.st
.It Matrix
.Lk https://matrix.to/#/#chat:irde.st
